Dynamic Environment Configuration
=================================

R10k uses a configuration file to determine how dynamic environments should be
deployed.

Config file location
--------------------

### Manual configuration

An explicit configuration file location be specified by providing the `--config`
option to `r10k deploy`, like so:

    r10k deploy --config /srv/puppet/r10k.yaml [...]

### Automatic configuration

If an explicit configuration file is not given, r10k will search the following
locations for a configuration file.

  * `{current working directory}/r10k.yaml`
  * `/etc/puppetlabs/r10k/r10k.yaml` (1.5.0 and later)
  * `/etc/r10k.yaml` (deprecated in 1.5.0)

In 1.5.0 r10k added `/etc/puppetlabs/r10k/r10k.yaml` to the configuration search
path. The old location, `/etc/r10k.yaml` has been deprecated in favor of the new
location. If both `/etc/puppetlabs/r10k/r10k.yaml` and `/etc/r10k.yaml` exist
and explicit configuration file has not been given, r10k will log a warning and
use `/etc/puppetlabs/r10k/r10.yaml`.

General options
---------------

### cachedir

The 'cachedir' setting specifies where r10k should keep cached information.
Right now this is predominantly used for caching git repositories but will be
expanded as other subsystems can take advantage of caching.

For example:

```yaml
---
# Store all cache information in /var/cache
cachedir: '/var/cache/r10k'
```


The cachedir setting defaults to `~/.r10k`. If the HOME environment variable is
unset r10k will assume that r10k is being run with the Puppet [`prerun_command`](http://docs.puppetlabs.com/references/latest/configuration.html#preruncommand)
setting and will set the cachedir default to `/root/.r10k`.

### proxy

The 'proxy' setting configures a proxy server to use for all operations which occur over
an HTTP(S) transport. You can override this setting for Git or Forge operations only by
setting the 'proxy' setting under the 'git' or 'forge' settings. You can also override
for a specific Git repository by setting a proxy in the 'repositories' list of the 'git'
setting. By default, r10k will look for and use the first environment variable it finds
in this list: HTTPS\_PROXY, https\_proxy, HTTP\_PROXY, http\_proxy. If no proxy setting
is found in the environment, this setting will default to use no proxy.

```yaml
proxy: 'http://proxy.example.com:3128'
```

r10k also supports using authenticated proxies with either Basic or Digest authentication:

```yaml
proxy: 'http://user:password@proxy.example.com:3128'
```

The proxy server being used will be logged at the "debug" level when r10k runs.

### pool_size

The pool_size setting is a number to determine how many threads should be spawn
while updating modules. The default value is 1, which means the default behaviour
is to update modules in a serial manner. Increasing this number should bring
some performance gains.

### git

The 'git' setting is a hash that contains Git specific settings.

#### provider

The provider option determines which Git provider should be used.

```yaml
git:
  provider: rugged # one of shellgit, rugged
```

See the [git provider documentation](../git/providers.mkd) for more information
regarding Git providers.

#### proxy

The 'proxy' setting allows you to set or override the global proxy setting specifically
for Git operations that use an HTTP(S) transport. See the global proxy setting documentation
for more information and examples.

#### username

The username setting is only used by the Rugged git provider.

The username option sets the username for SSH remotes when the SSH URL does not provide
a username. When used with a Git hosting service this is most sensibly set to 'git'.

The username defaults to the username of the currently logged in user.

```yaml
git:
  username: "git"
```

#### private_key

The private_key setting is only used by the Rugged git provider.

The private_key option specifies the path to the default Git SSH private key for Git SSH remotes.
The private_key setting must be set if SSH remotes are used.

```yaml
git:
  private_key: "/etc/puppetlabs/r10k/ssh/id_rsa"
```

#### repositories

The repositories option allows configuration to be set on a per-remote basis. Each entry is a map of
the repository URL and per-repository configuration for that repo.

##### private_key

A repository specific private key to use for SSH connections for the given repository URL. This
overrides the global private_key setting.

```yaml
git:
  repositories:
    - remote: "ssh://tessier-ashpool.freeside/protected-repo.git"
      private_key: "/etc/puppetlabs/r10k/ssh/id_rsa-protected-repo-deploy-key"
```

##### proxy

The 'proxy' setting allows you to set or override the global proxy setting for a single, specific
repository. See the global proxy setting documentation for more information and examples.

### forge

The 'forge' setting is a hash that contains settings for downloading modules
from the Puppet Forge.

#### proxy

The 'proxy' setting allows you to set or override the global proxy setting for all Forge
interactions. See the global proxy setting documentation for more information and examples.

#### baseurl

The 'baseurl' setting indicates where Forge modules should be installed from.
This defaults to 'https://forgeapi.puppetlabs.com'

```yaml
forge:
  baseurl: 'https://private-forge.mysite'
```

Deployment options
------------------

The following options configure how r10k deploys dynamic environments.

### postrun

The `postrun` setting specifies an arbitrary command to run after deploying all
environments. The command must be an array of strings that will be used as an
argument vector. The exit code of the command is not currently used, but the
command should exit with a return code of 0 as the exit code may have semantics
in the future.

```yaml
---
postrun: ['/usr/bin/curl', '-F', 'deploy=done', 'http://my-app.site/endpoint']
```

The postrun setting can only be set once.

Occurrences of the string `$modifiedenvs` in the postrun command will be
replaced with the current environment(s) being deployed.

### sources

The `sources` setting specifies what repositories should be used for creating
dynamic environments.  It is a hash where each key is the short name of a
specific repository (for instance, "qa" or "web" or "ops") and the value is a
hash of properties for that source.

```yaml
---
sources:
  main:
    # Source settings follow
```

### deploy

The `deploy` setting is a top level setting for controlling how r10k deploys
behave. At this point only new settings are included under this setting, but in
the long term the current top level deploy settings will be moved under
`deploy`.

#### purge\_levels

The `purge_levels` setting controls how aggressively r10k will purge unmanaged
content during a deployment. Given value must be a list of strings indicating at
what levels unmanaged content should be purged. The valid string options for the
list are 'deployment', 'environment', and 'puppetfile'.

```yaml
---
deploy:
  purge_levels: [ 'deployment', 'environment', 'puppetfile' ]
```

This setting currently only impacts the "deploy environment" action.

The default value is `['deployment', 'puppetfile']` to maintain parity with
existing behavior before this setting was added.

The effect of enabling the various purge levels is as follows:

##### deployment

After each deploy, in the configured basedir, r10k will recursively remove any
content found which is not managed by one of the sources declared in the r10k.yaml
configuration. Note that disabling this level of purging may cause the number of
deployed environments to grow without bound; deleting branches from a control
repo would no longer cause the matching environment to be purged.

##### environment

After a given environment is deployed, r10k will recursively remove any content
found which is neither committed to the control repo branch that maps to that
environment, nor declared in a Puppetfile committed to that branch.

Enabling this purge level will cause r10k to load and parse the Puppetfile for
the environment even without the `--puppetfile` flag being set. However,
Puppetfile content will still only be deployed if the environment is new or
the `--puppetfile` flag is set. Additionally, no environment-level content
will be purged if any errors are encountered while evaluating the Puppetfile
or deploying its contents.

Note that the .r10k-deploy.json file is exempt from this purging.

##### puppetfile

After Puppetfile content for a given environment is deployed, r10k will
recursively remove any content found in a directory managed by the Puppetfile
which is not also declared in that Puppetfile. Directories considered to be
managed by a Puppetfile include the configured `moduledir` (which defaults to
"modules") as well as alternate directories specified as an `install_path`
option to any Puppetfile content declarations.

#### purge\_whitelist

The `purge_whitelist` setting exempts the specified filename patterns from
being purged. This setting is currently only considered during `environment`
level purging. (See above.) Given value must be a list of shell style filename
patterns in string format.

See the Ruby [documentation for the `fnmatch` method](http://ruby-doc.org/core-2.2.0/File.html#method-c-fnmatch)
for more details on valid patterns. Note that the `FNM_PATHNAME` and
`FNM_DOTMATCH` flags are in effect when r10k considers the whitelist.

Patterns are relative to the root of the environment being purged and *do
not match recursively* by default. For example, a whitelist value of
`*myfile*` would only preserve a matching file at the root of the
environment. To preserve the file throughout the deployed environment,
a recursive pattern such as `**/*myfile*` would be required.

Files matching a whitelist pattern may still be removed if they exist in
a folder that is otherwise subject to purging. In this case, an additional
whitelist rule to preserve the containing folder is required.

```yaml
---
deploy:
  purge_whitelist: [ 'custom.json', '**/*.xpp' ]
```


#### write\_lock

The `write_lock` setting allows administrators to temporarily disallow r10k code
deploys without having to remove the r10k configuration entirely. This can be
useful to prevent r10k deploys at certain times or prevent r10k from interfering
with a common set of code that may be touched by multiple r10k configurations.

```yaml
---
deploy:
  write_lock: "Deploying code is disallowed until the next maintenance window (2038-01-19)"
```

#### generate\_types

The `generate_types` setting controls whether r10k should update generated types
after a successful environment update. See [Environment isolation](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/environment\_isolation.html)
for more information on generated types. Defaults to false.

```yaml
deploy:
  generate_types: true
```

#### puppet\_path

The path to the puppet executable used for generating types. Defaults to `/opt/puppetlabs/bin/puppet`.

```yaml
deploy:
  puppet_path: '/usr/local/bin/puppet'
```

Source options
--------------

The following options are respected by all source implementations. Sources may
implement other options in addition to the ones listed below; see the source
specific documentation for more information.

### remote

The 'remote' setting specifies where the source repository should be fetched
from. It may be any valid URL that the source may check out or clone. The remote
must be able to be fetched without any interactive input, eg usernames or
passwords cannot be prompted for in order to fetch the remote.

```yaml
---
sources:
  mysource:
    remote: 'git://git-server.site/my-org/main-modules'
```

### basedir

The 'basedir' setting specifies where environments will be created for this
source.  This directory will be entirely managed by r10k and any contents that
r10k did not put there will be _removed_.

```yaml
---
sources:
  mysource:
    basedir: '/etc/puppet/environments'
```

If two different sources have the same basedir, it's possible for them to create
two separate environments with the same name and file path. If this occurs r10k
will treat this as a fatal error and will abort. To avoid this, use prefixing on one
or both of the sources to make sure that all environment names are unique. See
also the [prefix](#prefix) setting.

### prefix

The prefix setting allows environment names to be prefixed with the short name
of the given source. This prevents collisions when multiple sources are deployed
into the same directory.

```yaml
---
sources:
  mysource:
    basedir: '/etc/puppet/environments'
    prefix: true # All environments will be prefixed with "mysource_"
```
#### prefix behaviour
* if `true` environment folder will be prefixed with the name of the source.
* if `false` (default) environment folder will not be prefixed
* if `String` environment folder will be prefixed with the `prefix` value.

### ignore_branch_prefixes

The 'ignore_branch_prefixes' setting causes environments to be ignored which match in part or whole
to any of the prefixes listed in the setting.
The setting is a list of strings. Each branch in
the 'git' repo will have its name tested against all prefixes and, if the prefix
is found, then an environment will not be deployed for this branch.
If no 'ignore_branch_prefixes' is specified, then all branches in the 'git' repo will
be deployed (default behavior).

#### ignore_branch_prefixes behaviour
* if empty, deploy environments for all branches
* for each branch in git repo
** if `branch.name` has a prefix found in `ignore_branch_prefixes`, then do not deploy an environment for branch

Example: do not deploy branches with names starting with (or completely named) 'test' or 'dev'.
```yaml
---
sources:
  mysource:
    basedir: '/etc/puppet/environments'
    ignore_branch_prefixes:
      - 'test'
      - 'dev'
```

Examples
--------

### Minimal example

The majority of users will only have a single repository where all modules and
hiera data files are kept. In this case you will specify a single source:

```yaml
---
sources:
  operations:
    remote: 'git://git-server.site/my-org/org-modules'
    basedir: '/etc/puppet/environments'
```

### Separate hiera data

For more complex cases where you want to store hiera data in a different
repository and your modules in another repository, you can specify two sources:

```yaml
---
sources:
  operations:
    remote: 'git://git-server.site/my-org/org-modules'
    basedir: '/etc/puppet/environments'
  hiera:
    remote: 'git://git-server.site/my-org/org-hiera-data'
    basedir: '/etc/puppet/hiera-data'
```

### Multiple tenancy

Alternately you may want to create separate environments from multiple
repositories. This is useful when you want two groups to be able to deploy
Puppet modules but they should only have write access to their own modules and
not the modules of other groups.

```yaml
---
sources:
  main:
    remote: 'git://git-server.site/my-org/main-modules'
    basedir: '/etc/puppet/environments'
    prefix: false # Prefix defaults to false so this is only here for clarity
  qa:
    remote: 'git://git-server.site/my-org/qa-puppet-modules'
    basedir: '/etc/puppet/environments'
    prefix: true
  dev:
    remote: 'git://git-server.site/my-org/dev-puppet-modules'
    basedir: '/etc/puppet/environments'
    prefix: true
```

This will create the following directory structure:

```
/etc/puppet/environments
|-- production       # main-modules repository, production branch
|-- upgrade_apache   # main-modules repository, upgrade_apache branch
|-- qa_production    # qa repository, production branch
|-- qa_jenkins_test  # qa repository, jenkins_test branch
|-- dev_production   # dev repository, production branch
`-- dev_loadtest     # dev repository, loadtest branch
```

#### Multiple tenancy with external hieradata

If hiera data is in a separate repository from your control repository, you
must override the `prefix` so environment folders line up in both directories:

```yaml
---
sources:
  app1_data:
    remote: 'git://git-server.site/my-org/app1-hieradata'
    basedir: '/etc/puppet/hieradata'
    prefix: "app1"
  app1_modules:
    remote: 'git://git-server.site/my-org/app1-puppet-modules'
    basedir: '/etc/puppet/environments'
    prefix: "app1"
```


This will create the following directory structure:

```
/etc/puppet/environments
|-- app1_production  # app1 modules repository, production branch
|-- app1_develop     # app1 modules repository, develop branch

/etc/puppet/hieradata
|-- app1_production  # app1 data repository, production branch
|-- app1_develop     # app1 data repository, develop branch
```
