Puppet master configuration
===========================

In order to use dynamic environments, your Puppet masters will need to be
configured to load manifests and modules relative to the requested environment.
The following settings should be configured in puppet.conf.

## Puppet <= 3.4.x

In Puppet 3.4 and earlier, dynamic environments are achieved by interpolating
the `$environment` variable in the modulepath, manifestdir, and manifest
settings. When environments is loaded the settings are dynamically set based on
the name of the environment, thus allowing environments to be created on the
fly.

    [master]
        modulepath = /etc/puppet/environments/$environment/modules:/etc/puppet/environments/$environment/dist

        # If you use a top level manifest dir
        manifestdir = /etc/puppet/environments/$environment/manifests
        # If you use a specific site wide manifest
        manifest = /etc/puppet/environments/$environment/manifests/nodes.pp

## Puppet = 3.5.x

Puppet 3.5.0 adds initial support for "directory environments", where
environments are created by enumerating directories in `$environmentpath`.
This new configuration expect that all modules are in the root of the
directories in the environment path.

    [master]
    # None of modulepath, manifestdir, or manifest should be enabled
    # See http://docs.puppetlabs.com/puppet/latest/reference/environments.html#enabling-directory-environments
    #   for more information on the changes
        environmentpath = $confdir/environments

Note that these settings go into the `[master]` section; you don't need to
explicitly configure an environment section for each environment you want to
use. (But you can if you want.)

## Puppet >= 3.6.0

[environmentconf]: https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/environments_creating.html#the-environment.conf-file

Puppet 3.6.0 adds more fine grained control over how directory environments are
configured. Each directory based environment can have an
[`environment.conf`][environmentconf] file in the root of that environment that
can specify the manifest, modulepath, config_version, and environment_timeout
for that specific environment.

    # puppet.conf
    [master]
    # None of modulepath, manifestdir, or manifest should be enabled
    # See http://docs.puppetlabs.com/puppet/latest/reference/environments.html#enabling-directory-environments
    #   for more information on the changes
        environmentpath = $confdir/environments

- - -

    # environment.conf
    manifest  = site.pp
    moduledir = modules:dist

A deployed environment with a Puppetfile will look something like this:

    .
    ├── Puppetfile
    ├── environment.conf
    ├── dist
    └── modules
