Frequently Asked Questions
==========================

### How can run I `puppet generate types` for each changed environment during deployment?

The command `puppet generate types` creates Puppet signatures for custom
types circumventing the need to load their Ruby code during compilation.
This prevents the type definitions from "leaking" across environments.

Best practice currently is to run this command as part of your Puppet
code deployment pipeline, and r10k's postrun command ability is a natural
place to do so.

The postrun command will have any occurance of "$modifiedenvs" replaced
with a space-seperated list of environments the deploy was configured to
modify. For example creating the script:

```
$ cat /usr/local/bin/generate-puppet-types.sh
!#/bin/bash

for environment in $1; do
  /opt/puppetlabs/bin/puppet generate types --environment $environment
done
```

And configuring r10k such:
```
$ tail -2 /etc/puppetlabs/r10k/r10k.yaml

postrun: ["/usr/local/bin/generate-puppet-types.sh", "$modifiedenvs"]
```

Should provide you with the necessary generate type definitions for
improved environment isolation.



### The default Git branch is 'master', while the default Puppet environment is 'production'. How do I reconcile this?

The default Git branch name is 'master', but this is a somewhat arbitrary name
and doesn't necessarily map to every use case. In the case of R10K it's generally
easiest to rename 'master' to 'production'. You can rename the master branch
with the following:

```
git branch -m master production
git push --set-upstream origin production
```

Note that this will only create a new branch called production with a copy of
master - to change the default branch for all subsequent clones, read on.

#### Changing the default branch for bare Git repositories

When you clone a repository, Git checks out the [currently active branch][git-clone]
on the remote repository. Changing this for a non-bare repository is simple - just
check out a different branch and subsequent clones from that repository will
use that branch.

For bare repositories things are a bit more complex. Bare repositories do not
have a working directory that can be checked out, but they do have a [symbolic
ref][git-symbolic-ref] that serves the same role. To change this, run the
following command:

```
git --git-dir /path/to/bare/repo symbolic-ref HEAD refs/heads/production
```

#### Changing the default branch for different Git services

For Git hosting services where you may not cannot directly invoke commands,
there are usually administrative tools to allow you to change the default branch
on your remote repositories:

  * [GitHub][github-default-branch]
  * [Bitbucket][bitbucket-default-branch]
  * [Gitolite v2][gitolite-v2-default-branch]
  * [Gitolite v3][gitolite-v3-default-branch]

[git-clone]: https://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/git-clone.html "Man page for git-clone"
[git-symbolic-ref]: https://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/git-symbolic-ref.html "Man page for git-symbolic-ref"

[github-default-branch]: https://help.github.com/articles/setting-the-default-branch "Changing the default branch on GitHub"
[bitbucket-default-branch]: https://answers.atlassian.com/questions/280944/how-to-change-main-branch-in-bitbucket "Changing the default branch on Bitbucket"
[gitolite-v2-default-branch]: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/7091599/git-default-remote-branch-with-gitolite "Changing the default branch on Gitolite v2"
[gitolite-v3-default-branch]: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/13949093/git-change-default-branch-gitolite "Changing the default branch on Gitolite v3"

### How do I prevent r10k from removing modules in the `/modules` directory of my Git repository?

By default, r10k will install modules specified in the Puppetfile into the
`/modules` directory of each environment, but if you already use that directory
and keep modules in it, r10k may think those modules are not meant to exist and
may remove them.

There are three ways of fixing this: including your local modules in the
Puppetfile, moving the directory where r10k install Puppetfile sourced modules,
or moving your modules.

#### Including your local modules in the Puppetfile

The Puppetfile has a concept of a "local" module, otherwise known as a module
that r10k did not directly placed there but should not be removed. If you want
to continue keep your modules in the `/modules` directory and still install
external modules from the Puppetfile into that directory, you can add a `mod`
directive to the Puppetfile for each of your local modules.

```

mod 'my_ntp', :local => true
mod 'roles', :local => true
mod 'profiles', :local => true

# Include your external modules as usual
mod 'puppetlabs/stdlib'
mod 'puppetlabs/apache'
```

#### Move where the Puppetfile installs external modules

Instead of having to add a module entry for each of your local modules, you can
simply move where the Puppetfile installs modules with the `moduledir` setting.

```
# The moduledir setting must be set before any modules are created
moduledir "external-modules"

mod 'puppetlabs/stdlib'
mod 'puppetlabs/apache'
```

In Puppet 3.6 and later you can create an `environment.conf` in the root of your
environment to indicate which directories contain modules:

```
# environment.conf
modulepath = modules:external-modules
```

#### Move your local modules

Lastly, you can simply move your locally versioned modules to a separate
directory to avoid conflicting over the `/modules` directory entirely. With this
example as well you can use the `environment.conf` file to tell Puppet which
directories contain modules.

```
# environment.conf
modulepath = internal-modules:modules
```

#### Does R10K support Local/Private Forge?

Yes. Set the Forge to use _globally_ in `r10k.yaml`. see [Configuration](/doc/dynamic-environments/configuration.mkd#baseurl) for details.


#### What does the name mean?

It’s called R10K because I’m terrible at names. When I started working on R10K
I couldn’t come up with a decent name. While trying to come up with something
clever, I recalled that Randall Munroe wrote a bot for [controlling IRC chatter](http://blog.xkcd.com/2008/01/14/robot9000-and-xkcd-signal-attacking-noise-in-chat/),
and gave it the most generic name he could think of - Robot 9000. Since I just
needed a name, any name, I decided to go with an equally generic name by
incrementing the robot index.
